**Lithium miners face their rite of passage**
Lithium had never scored a mention in the federal budget papers until Treasurer Jim Chalmers took control of the national purse.
When Canberra’s deciduous trees transform in the month of May, budget watchers have traditionally gone red in the face talking about iron ore prices as the biggest variable affecting federal revenues.
Sure enough, iron ore was mentioned 28 times in Dr Chalmers’ budget strategy and outlook paper this year. But three references to lithium in the same document provided a symbolic reminder of the changes under way in the Australian mining industry and reminders of the iron ore boom are hard to miss as the country’s lithium sector matures.
Take for instance Australia’s third-largest lithium mine, Wodgina. A decade ago, it was better known as an iron ore mine run by David Flanagan’s Atlas Iron. The Wodgina ore was crushed and processed by Chris Ellison’s Mineral Resources, the same company that now runs Wodgina as a lithium asset and claims to be one of the world’s top five lithium extractors by volume.
One of the many lithium explorers that have MinRes on their share register is Delta Lithium, the company Flanagan ran until Ellison pushed him out in September. Atlas Iron is now owned by Gina Rinehart, who has spent billions this year disrupting foreign attempts to acquire Australian lithium mines.
And, the man who replaced Flanagan at the helm of Atlas Iron, Ken Brinsden, is now lithium royalty after solid innings at Pilbara Minerals and Patriot Battery Minerals.
Australia’s next big lithium producer, Liontown, is run by former BHP iron ore heavyweight Tony Ottaviano, while the nation’s biggest iron ore exporter, Rio Tinto, has acquired undeveloped lithium assets in Australia and Argentina.
All that experience with Australia’s most lucrative export commodity would have been helpful this week, as slumping lithium prices triggered the sort of mass anxiety usually reserved for crashes in the iron ore price.
Just as they did a decade ago in iron ore, lithium investors are now fretting whether “high-cost” Chinese producers will act rationally and curtail production when lithium prices dip below their cost of production.
Just as they did a decade ago in coal and iron ore, Australian miners are starting to talk about working together to create a new price discovery platform that could provide less volatility and more transparency.
If lithium is to one day supplant iron ore as the nation’s most lucrative export commodity, these next few months might be remembered as a crucial rite of passage.
*By the tonne*
If Dr Chalmers had included a lithium price forecast in the May budget – which he didn’t – he might have settled on something like $US3000 a tonne. That’s what most stockbrokers were thinking in May, after a year in which the price had tested $US8000 a tonne, according to some price providers.
By July 3, the Department of Industry predicted that Australian miners would get $US2740 for each tonne of lithium-rich spodumene concentrate they sold in 2024, and about $US2149 a tonne through 2025.
Reality has bitten hard; Australian spodumene concentrate was selling for $US1675 a tonne this week, according to prices published by Benchmark Mineral Intelligence.
The slump has been driven mostly by weaker than expected demand. Global sales of electric vehicles in the 10 months to October 31 were 33 per cent higher than the same period of 2022, but in the world of lithium, that’s considered underwhelming.
London consultancy Rho Motion said 10.6 million electric vehicles were sold globally in the 10 months to October 31; up from 7.9 million and 4.8 million in the same periods of 2022 and 2021 respectively.
Rho Motion analyst Will Roberts pointed to sobering announcements by automakers like Ford and General Motors, who have slowed the pace of their push into electric vehicles as they struggle to get new factories working and battle unions over pay rise requests.
“While this is concerning, evidence still does not appear to point drastically to the consumer appetite. More so production difficulties and profitability,” he said. “It’s likely delays and slowdowns from these automakers is to protect profit in the near term.”
Spodumene prices have continued to slide despite many Australian mines reporting weak output in the three months to September 30. Sales from the Greenbushes mine, Australia’s biggest, were down 9 per cent in the September quarter. Wodgina sales were down 29 per cent sequentially, while Pilbara Minerals reported a 17 per cent slide in sales volumes.
“We certainly didn’t see a supply surge over the last year. Rather, there has been a large number of new projects announced, many of which have begun commissioning or reached full capacity only just recently,” said Benchmark analyst Cameron Perks. “So there is a perception of high levels of supply.”
Most Australian miners are still making good margins at a spodumene price of $US1675 a tonne; Pilbara Minerals can mine, refine, insure and deliver a tonne of spodumene to a customer for $US658 a tonne.
Liontown’s all-in sustaining costs will also average somewhere around $US600 a tonne over the first 10 years of mining at its Kathleen Valley project. ASX-listed Piedmont and Sayona are producing spodumene in North America for about $US800 ($1200) a tonne, and those costs will likely fall as volumes ramp up.
But therein lies the risk of a race to the bottom; most major lithium players plan to grow production volumes in the year ahead to lower their unit costs, and the result could be further declines in spodumene prices.
Goldman Sachs predicts the commodity will average $US1250 a tonne in 2024, then $US800 a tonne in 2025 before recovering to $US1126 a tonne in 2026.
*Iron ore’s plunge*
If a feeling of déjà vu is starting to take hold, that’s because a very similar narrative played out in iron ore between 2011 and 2016 when rapid volume growth by Fortescue, Roy Hill, Rio, BHP, Vale and Anglo American crushed prices for the steelmaking ingredient.
The drama reached its zenith in 2015 when Fortescue founder Andrew Forrest publicly called for all miners to cap their volumes, in a suggestion that critics dismissed as akin to running a cartel.
An article of faith for many during the early stages of the iron ore boom was the notion of a price “floor” at close to $US110 a tonne. That was supposedly the breakeven price for the rump of Chinese iron ore miners who were collectively too big to fail for the Chinese steel industry.
WA iron ore miners like Fortescue learned the hard way that no such floor existed, with prices spending extended periods below $US100 a tonne.
A very similar debate has unfolded this year around marginal Chinese miners producing lithium out of mica rocks called lepidolite. The lithium content in lepidolite is low and separating it from impurities is harder than for spodumene. Yet amid booming prices over the past couple of years, the volume of lithium produced by Chinese lepidolite miners has been surprisingly large.
“The marginal producers are low-grade mica deposits in China, and will be the first ones to come off-line if acting rationally,” said Dr Perks. “However, cheap access to capital and motivation to retain jobs will be a major factor.
“I think these projects could be below the ‘economic floor’ for longer than one might expect.”
Core Lithium boss Gareth Manderson – a former Rio Tinto iron ore executive – is just back from a trip to North Asia and said it was difficult to understand what was happening in China at the moment.
“We see producers of lithium products supplying at below their cost of production,” he said. “It is not particularly clear how the market is going to mature and so it’s going to be choppy for a while.
“We’ve got to think about how we position ourselves in that volatility.”
With spodumene prices now between 70 per cent and 80 per cent lower than in January, AustralianSuper senior portfolio manager Luke Smith reckons it is the right time to position in high-quality lithium stocks.
“Lithium prices are currently deflated and are now starting to breach the top end of the current cost curve of the industry, a marker in any commodity’s cycle,” he said.
Smith’s team spent about $40 million on Pilbara Minerals shares in the final week of November, making the nation’s biggest pension fund a substantial shareholder of Pilbara with just over 5 per cent.
With so much riding on the trajectory of lithium prices, it’s natural that people start to focus on how prices are set.
The opacity of lithium prices was one of the reasons mainstream banks were initially reluctant to lend to the sector, a trend that appears to be over now that NAB, Westpac, Commonwealth Bank and ANZ are all lending to pre-revenue Liontown.
*A price for everything*
Most major commodity price reporting agencies now offer lithium indexes and use journalistic methods to determine the daily market prices that are inked into sales contracts.
While price discovery is better now than it was during the first lithium boom, some miners believe there is room for improvement.
Liontown’s Tony Ottaviano was a senior member of BHP’s iron ore team in 2012 when the miner joined with peers such as Rio and big Chinese customers like Baosteel to create a pricing portal called GlobalOre that was designed to provide more transparency on bids, offers and trades.
Many of the same companies were involved in creation of an equivalent price discovery platform for coking coal called GlobalCoal.
Mr Ottaviano said there could be merit in price reporting agencies, lithium miners and customers considering a similar model for the battery mineral.
“I expect to see a maturing of lithium pricing indices over time to more accurately reflect globally traded physicals, in contrast to the relatively opaque ‘market sounding’ carried out by price reporting agencies in the absence of physical trades,” he said.
“Ultimately, I think you’d see general industry support for the formation of a broad-based lithium exchange, providing direct market reporting as GlobalOre did for iron ore and London-based GlobalCoal did for met coal last decade.”
Liontown has consciously avoided China in signing binding five-year offtake agreements with South Korea’s LG Chem, Tesla and Ford that account for 450,000 tonnes a year, or 90 per cent, of the spodumene concentrate its flagship Kathleen Valley is slated to produce from mid-2024.
Representatives of those customers were in the room when Liontown held its annual general meeting in Perth on Thursday.
After a decade of extreme highs and lows in lithium prices, Mr Ottaviano told Thursday’s meeting that smart battery and carmakers had come to realise it was not in their long-term interests to drive lithium prices to extreme lows, lest they force mines to shut and sow the seeds of a future supply shortage.
“What certain OEMs [original equipment manufacturers] have now realised in the mining industry is if you do not keep the inducement price – the incentive price signal – alive, exploration and development in mining turns off,” he said.
“And then we cannot turn it back on when it takes between five to 10 years to bring on greenfields capacity. There are customers in the room and they are very good customers. They are loyal customers. They understand the benefit of true partnerships through the good and the bad.”